## Biosecuring Hong Kong

In the fall of 2002 rumors circulated through epidemiology mailing lists about cases of an atypical pneumonia sighted in the Guangdong Province, China. By the end of March 2003 the so called SARS disease (severe acute respiratory syndrome) has spread to 29 countries with 8422 cases and 916 fatalities (WHO 2003a). The threat of an unknown disease and its potential global spread did trigger an extraordinary media coverage around the world. Depending on the analytical standpoint, the SARS incident is either demonstrating “dramatically the global havoc that can be wreaked by a newly emerging disease” (WHO 2003b, 2) or it may be considered as a prime example for the current power of the imagination of a “Viral Apocalypse” (Keränen 2011). As Lisa Keränen argues, the media attention given to emerging diseases seems rather imbalanced just taking into account the actual fatalities. Many much deadlier threats do not receive comparable coverage. Instead, the recurrent interest can be explained with the special power of the ‘Viral Apocalypse’ trope, a “cultural form [that] invigorates anxieties about globalization and its increasing contact with the Other into a vivid but distressing postpandemic future” (Keränen 2011, 461). Concerns about pandemics prompt media attention, large-scale funding and action much more than regular occurring killers such as food-borne pathogens or phone-related traffic accidents. By any means, the SARS incident later turned out as an important point of reference for an ‘emerging diseases worldview’ that established itself at that time. SARS quite perfectly showcased the unknown infectious disease threat and its characteristics: An unknown agent spreading rapidly and globally, and which was contained only because of technologies of early warning and surveillance (Heymann and Rodier 2004). 

The disease was severely felt especially in Toronto, Singapore and Hong Kong. For several reasons, the Hong Kong Special Administration Region stands out as a special case.
First, the global dissemination of the infection could be traced back to a single traveller passing through the city. A physician who had treated patients with atypical pneumonia in Guangdong made a stop-over in a four-star hotel in Hong Kong February 21, 2003. After his stay, guests and visitors on the hotel’s 9th floor became infected and eventually disseminated the disease globally (WHO 2003b).

Second, only in Hong Kong SARS showed a particular puzzling pattern of transmission. The housing complex of Amoy Gardens became the site of a disproportional share of infected persons, qualifying as a point source outbreak. Airborne and waterborne transmission could not be supported by laboratory results and the Amoy Gardens outbreak hints at an environmental source still not fully understood (Anderson et al. 2004).

Third, SARS in Hong Kong became a much severe political problem rather than only a medical crisis (Ma 2004). The epidemic evoked an intense political debate where angry citizens attacked the Chief Executive of the Hong Kong government for being complacent and for downplaying the threat at its outset. The SARS crisis took place in a phase where the government already had been caught in the crossfire of conflicting demands and interests in the changing business environment after the handover (Chiu and Lui 2009). Besides the high share of fatalities and a crisis of confidence into the city government, Hong Kong also suffered an economical blow with half of the regular retail sales in April 2003 and one third of the regular tourism arrivals vanishing (Price-Smith and Huang 2009). Though hard to estimate, the Wall Street Journal calculated SARS related economic damage in Hong Kong to up to 15 billion US$ (Saywell et al. 2003).

For several reasons, Hong Kong may also be considered a special example for measures of infection control.

First, the efforts of infection control in Hong Kong do receive considerable attention from a Global Health community. Being a gateway to China and Asia and given the unparalleled population density, many observers already considered Hong Kong a likely place for a new disease to emerge (Fidler 2004). The Global Health community expressed an expectation towards Hong Kong to assure the containment of a possible next disease.

Second, a central aim of the Chief Executive of the SAR government since the late 1990ies had been to establish the image of Hong Kong as “Asia’s World City”. Especially after the handover, ambitious projects had been funded to secure the Hong Kong’s position among ‘global cities’ and to further attract the relocation of headquarters and foreign investment (Chiu and Lui 2009). The West Kowloon project for example was planned in 1998 as a leading international arts and cultural centre (Chu 2010). Against this policy of “world class city”-branding, the SARS crisis turned out to be additionally devastating and it became especially important for the government to send a strong message of disease prevention afterwards.

Due to such external and internal pressures the public health intervention is expected to be especially thorough in the aftermath of the SARS crisis. The case of Hong Kong could serve as a lucid example of local public health interventions in the context of an ‘emerging diseases worldview’.


### Locating Sick Bodies

The confrontation of SARS, at least in the beginning, dealt with an unknown enemy where neither the agent, the routes of transmission, the incubation period, nor the mortality were known. This lack of knowledge is a defining feature of the threats depicted in an ‘emerging diseases worldview’ and has implications for the resulting prevention approach. The confrontation with an unknown enemy does bear a special uneasiness that needs to be resolved. As Eva Horn argues, the multiplication of essentially shapeless enemies (the failing infrastructure, the emerging virus, the networks of cybercrime) does generate an epistemic horror vacui, the fear of something that does not take form (Horn, 2008: 5). Horn understands the multiplication of such images as a result of the increasing importance of self-regulated systems and their functioning for our current social and economic life. The rise of the image of a shapeless enemy does express the political fear of losing control in a world increasingly dependent on several infrastructures - of trade, travel, energy provision and waste removal - and their complex and often algorithmically (self-)regulated interaction. 

In the case of Hong Kong, one strategy of dealing with the uncertainties of the unknown infection was the spatialization of fear through the identification and localization of “sick bodies”.

A sudden interest in one’s own bodily functions and in those of others can be assumed in a situation of the spread of an unknown disease. As to be expected, the question of a possibly contagious passer-by became central in the daily use of the city and the identification of “sick bodies” became central in several coping strategies and prevention measures in the aftermath of the SARS crisis.

“During the SARS crisis, problems of the body were stripped bare. They became the indisputable center of the entire crisis, and according to people within this crisis, all problems were far overshadowed by those of the body.” (Wang et al. 2004, 587)
The identification of infected persons and their separation to prevent the spread of disease can be considered as a very basic approach in infection control. In the case of SARS in Hong Kong, this identification turned out to be problematic as the nosological details of the by then unknown disease were not entirely clear. In that situation the identification and localization of “sick bodies” became a public concern - and in the end a crowd-sourced effort.

The considerable broad adaption of new data technologies and mobile communication devices in Hong Kong played an important role in the shaping of the SARS response. In a somewhat unplanned way, the fear of the unknown disease had been partly eased through a crowd-sourced spatialization of the threat, identifying “sick bodies” through the proxy of their home addresses.

Initially, the city government had been reluctant in giving out any information on the location of infected people and stated that all infections became safely contained in hospitals. Many people did not believe those official statements and felt the need to do something to protect themselves. Initiated by four science students, the website www.sosick.org was put online end of March 2003 as a shared resource listing all “infected buildings”. The general public was invited to add information via email. The site turned out to be unexpectedly successful with hundreds of emails sent in daily detailing infections. Between April 2 and April 21 the site had been accessed 5 million times (Roloff 2007).

Based on that interest, the Department of Health changed its policy and gave out data of infections on the level of individual addresses. Several other web-sites went online following the example and success of sosick.org. Those sites, one by the Department of Geography, others by newspapers and media agencies, did go beyond a mere listing of “infected buildings” and visualized the data on a Hong Kong map in different ways. The infection map issued by the Yellow Pages did allow to integrate additional information onto those maps. Users were able to choose different layers of information to be mashed up with the red dots of the “infected buildings” on the Hong Kong street grid. Layers presented information on the population density of the respective area, the average age of the local residents and whether the “infected building” was located in a public or private housing complex.

Eventually, those crowd-sourced data gathering technologies turned into devices of spatializing fear on the urban scale. The city after SARS became legible in a new way based on those crowd-sourced landscapes of fear. In a situation of uncertainty and fear, a localization of “infected buildings” could provide some actionable guideline. To avoid certain places was something to do, especially at a time when medical knowledge about the infection and its route of transmission was not reliable. A telecommunication company even offered a location based service so that subscribers received a text message when they were approaching an “infected building”.

In the end, new technologies available with this “first pandemic of the 21st century” provided the ability to publicly blame sick bodies mediated through their home addresses. The mashup with demographic data on some of the sites further allowed to stigmatize inhabitants based on prejudices. The presentation of building type, the neighbourhood’s population density and the neighbour’s average age, invited into a biased reading of old, crowded and poor as especially dangerous. Those tools play into a common pattern where health concerns intensify the stigmatization of already despised populations and the spaces where they live (Wald 2008).

The public efforts in locating “sick bodies” in turn express the sudden relevance of the bodily functions for the social interactions in a situation of unknown disease. To demonstrate hygiene and to assure the possession of a healthy body suddenly becomes a prerequisite for the continuation of everyday interactions. In an effort to regain something actionable in the situation of uncertainty, residents started to put on face masks covering mouth and nose. Medical experts doubted the effectiveness of those masks in preventing infections and the mayor at first ridiculed their use. Nonetheless, face masks rapidly became common use and the mayor was heavily criticized from a broader public. The masks became a visual sign of responsibility for the health of the community. A certain “face mask culture” evolved in response to SARS with individually painted masks spreading and masks even being incorporated into the product line of modern urban fashion labels. Still, the face mask also gives a strong visual hint towards bodily functions underlying the social subjects of everyday interactions.
This “face mask culture” shows lasting effects up until today. Still, the wearing of masks in public spaces is regarded as an act of responsibility if one is noticing symptoms of influenza or cough. As a result, a new and easily recognizable marker for the healthy - unhealthy divide exists to sort the anonymous crowd of the everyday commute in public transport or at public spaces. Masks in public space are a constant reminder about the possible contagious aspect of others. The moral obligation to wear a mask does single out unhealthy individuals from the anonymity of public space and allows others to watch and assess individual behaviour more closely. The face mask culture can be understood as a technology of control where individuals visibly address themselves as unhealthy bodies and underline that they do understand themselves as responsible subjects. They demonstrate their will to subjugate to hygiene norms and invite a general public to held their actions against those norms.

The bodily aspect of city users is suddenly a registered fact in the everyday interactions: the city map becomes collectively redrawn, marking out “infected buildings” and thereby the probable whereabouts of “sick bodies”. The face masks act as a visible reminder for the existence of those “sick bodies” regardless if the mask is worn by a responsible patient or by a healthy individual out of anxious precaution.

To be reminded of one’s bodily functions is also part of the arrival process in Hong Kong. Initiated by the SARS event, infrared devices have been installed at border points where all departing, arriving and transiting passengers are remotely scanned for their body temperature. 320 of those devices are in operation today. If the scanner shows a temperature higher than 98 degree Fahrenheit, the person is picked out and put into a preventive two-day quarantine. From a medical standpoint, this scanning is not highly effective as viral infections regularly have a longer incubation period than today’s usually short travel times. Fever symptoms regularly will develop days after passing the infrared scanners. Still, the city maintains this practice until today, partly to demonstrate awareness and agency. At the Hong Kong airport, the Department of Health maintains a highly visible manned version of such a scanner.
The fear of infection is mediated by individualizing and localizing it in the examples of “infected buildings”, face masks and the remote temperature checks on incoming passengers. In all cases, individuals are reductively approached as healthy/unhealthy bodies and this binary is mapped, visualized on the face or it does ring an alarm and triggers quarantine at the airport. In an unprecedented way, bodily conditions become a prerequisite to be able to use the city in Hong Kong after SARS.



### Vitalizing the City

Contrasting the move to identify individual bodies, the diverse power relations set into motion for the purpose of infection control and public health after SARS also modify the object of such biopolitical regulations. New interventions and related discourses treat and target the city itself as the new object of public health. The city becomes vitalized as a collective body in the refocused public health regime.
One of the city administration’s initial reactions to the SARS events had been to deploy an intensified hygiene regime. Cleanliness had for a long time been important for the city administration in order to establish Hong Kong as a “world class city” and explicitly to distinguish itself from cities in mainland China (Roloff 2007). The SARS events provided the reason to double those efforts and to broaden the scope of ordinary street cleaning. A dedicated task force, the so called Team Clean had been established as one of the responses to SARS with a comparatively broad agenda:

“To turn Hong Kong into a clean city for good, it is necessary to go to the root of the problem and to take a holistic approach. We believe that all efforts must begin with the self, extend to the family and the immediate neighbourhood, and then radiate throughout the entire community of Hong Kong before we can claim a place as a world-class city.” (Team Clean 2003a, 7)

The intensified hygiene discourse triggered by the SARS events draws everything from personal hand-washing routines, food regulation infringements up towards building design into an integrated task of public hygiene. Measures encompassed doubling the fines for spitting and littering to 1500 HK$ (around 200 US$), doubling the street cleaning work-force to nearly 8000 persons, identifying 258 hygiene “blackspots” throughout the city, improving the building design of new public housing estates. A thereby thoroughly cleaned city should prevent contagion much in the same way as it was conceived in the theories on miasmatic air spreading disease in the 19th century. The Team Clean strategy is conceived independent of current medical knowledge as it becomes explicitly stated. The holistic concept of a clean city is convincing on its own.

“While the direct causal relationship between urban design and SARS cannot be scientifically established, we are in total agreement that urban design can help shape and improve the physical environment towards healthier living.” (Team Clean 2003b, 64)

The intensified and all-encompassing measures towards a clean city are based on an analogy between individual bodies, personal homes and the city as a whole. The city becomes vitalized as a collective body to be kept clean in the rationale of Team Clean.
This apotheosis of the clean city towards a collective body and its holistic orderly appearance as a precondition for the vitality of its inhabitants does in turn allow and legitimize rather harsh interventions into the uses of public space. The identified “blackspots” mostly converge with those public places also used by homeless people, panhandlers and informal street-vendors. The cleaning of those “blackspots” often meant the unpitying displacement of people dependent on those spaces, or, to put it differently, the hygiene regime provided legitimation to govern social deviance through space (Belina 2007).

The working program of Team Clean does imply a conception of the city as a collective body which should be treated with the same hygiene standards as any of its individual bodies. This ‘city as a body’ analogy also informs new efforts of public health surveillance employed after the SARS events.

The SARS crisis established a direct cooperation between the Hong Kong Police and the Health Department that did not exist before. During the 1990ies, the police has been building up the so called “Major Incident Investigation and Disaster Support System” (MIIDSS), integrating a range of different crime related data. During the SARS crisis, health authorities were given access to the system and it played an important role in tracing contacts of SARS patients in order to find possible transmissions (Kong 2004).

Hospitals entered all patient data into a shared online-database (eSARS) and those data were fed in real-time into the MIIDSS system. The technology allowed to handle the overload of incoming patient details, to validate address data and to analyse geographical distribution. Through use of the system, hot spots and routes of contagion could be visualized on the fly (Chu and Slough, 2003). Every patient had to report the history of his or her activities and interactions for at least ten days backwards, and this information was used to trace probable exposure by time, place and person. “It’s the first time in Hong Kong that a police system has helped a health organisation to deal with a health problem”, as the Chief Inspector Alan Chan Lun told the press (Chu and Yeung 2004).

This cooperation became institutionalized in the aftermath. Since 2007 a workstation of the MIIDSS system is installed at the Centre for Health Protection.

Triggered by the SARS events, Hong Kong became a pioneer regarding the use of investigative technologies for the purpose of infection control and health monitoring. In the meantime, Biosurveillance has become a significant feature of several national infection control efforts (Barker 2014). Responding to the ‘emerging diseases worldview’ and its demand for preparedness, surveillance and early detection, comparable cooperation and technologies have been employed in the US (Fearnley 2008), the UK, and France (Triple S Project 2011). These developments strengthen an understanding of public health mainly as a security question with problematic implications (Cooper 2006).

Technologies do not only alter the ways of providing public health but do also impact the goals public health is aiming for. Technologies are not neutral, technical devices are not simply tools to solve a given problem, but do actively shape the way how we understand and approach the world. “The things we call ‘technologies’ are ways of building order in our world” (Winner 1980, 127) and these distinct orderings are influential in what merely appears as a ‘solvable problem’ or how reality is ‘given’ to us. Such an understanding of technology as an active agent in producing the world and not only our perception of it, has been broadly established by Foucault’s concepts of discursive formation and the ‘dispositif’. Foucault prominently stressed that what is conceived as a problem, what needs to be done and even ‘truth’ itself has to be understood as an effect of power relations. It is in the interplay of a heterogeneous ensemble of discursive and non-discursive elements that a certain rationality emerges. Discourses, institutions, architectural forms and procedures altogether establish such discursive formations (Foucault 1980). Following Foucault’s analytical proposal, I am interested in the rationality that is brought into effect through systems and technologies such as MIDSS.
This perspective allows to understand the changing aims and objects of concern underlying the urge to employ such investigative systems for public health provision. What is the thing called public health that presents itself through systems of near real-time monitoring? What are likely interventions of infection control based on the ability to monitor hot spots and routes of transmission ‘as it happens’?

Questioned in this way, the new technologies of infection control point out a shift regarding the object of public health. New methods of monitoring establish the collective body of the city as the new object of care. Measures of surveillance or transmission tracking are employed predominantly for a ‘peak prevention’ in the health care system. Acknowledging the impossibility to isolate all contacts early enough in a dense and multi-connected city, the goal can only be to slow down transmission and to avoid clusterings. Instead of engaging with the impossible task to prevent infections at all, the goal should rather be to prevent overload and to ensure the continuous functioning of emergency rooms, primary health care facilities and hospitals (“Author’s Interview with Ben Cowling 2011). New monitoring technologies allow predominantly to discern possible dangers for the functioning of the public health system as such. The object of this public health thinking is not so much how collective health can be measured or improved but to assure the functioning of public health as a “vital system” (Collier and Lakoff 2015; Lakoff 2008).

Again, as seen with the intensified hygiene efforts, the city as a whole becomes animated as a collective body whose bodily functions have to be monitored and whose vital processes have to be assured. According to Michael Fisch, the ‘Smart City’ today is increasingly been envisioned as a neurological organism, emphasizing density of connection and information flow. The city is presented “as a form of an emergent, living organism, in which the symbiotic interaction among distributed systems enables [it] to sense and respond as a global entity to changes in its internal milieu” (Fisch 2013, 322) The intensified hygiene efforts as well as the employed technologies of health surveillance in Hong Kong after SARS underline those findings for public health.

