## Case-Study Hong Kong

In the fall of 2002 rumors circulated through epidemiology mailing lists about cases of an atypical pneumonia sighted in the Guangdong Province, China. By the end of March 2003 the so called SARS disease (severe acute respiratory syndrome) has spread to 29 countries with 8422 cases and 916 fatalities (WHO 2003a). The threat of an unknown disease and its potential global spread did trigger an extraordinary media coverage around the world. Depending on the analytical standpoint, the SARS incident is either demonstrating “dramatically the global havoc that can be wreaked by a newly emerging disease” (WHO 2003b, 2) or it may be considered as a prime example for the current power of the imagination of a “Viral Apocalypse” (Keränen 2011). As Lisa Keränen argues, the media attention given to emerging diseases seems rather imbalanced just taking into account the actual fatalities. Many much deadlier threats do not receive comparable coverage. Instead, the recurrent interest can be explained with the special power of the ‘Viral Apocalypse’ trope, a “cultural form [that] invigorates anxieties about globalization and its increasing contact with the Other into a vivid but distressing postpandemic future” (Keränen 2011, 461). Concerns about pandemics prompt media attention, large-scale funding and action much more than regular occurring killers such as food-borne pathogens or phone-related traffic accidents. By any means, the SARS incident later turned out as an important point of reference for an ‘emerging diseases worldview’ that established itself at that time. SARS quite perfectly showcased the unknown infectious disease threat and its characteristics: An unknown agent spreading rapidly and globally, and which was contained only because of technologies of early warning and surveillance (Heymann and Rodier 2004). 

The disease was severely felt especially in Toronto, Singapore and Hong Kong. For several reasons, the Hong Kong Special Administration Region stands out as a special case.
First, the global dissemination of the infection could be traced back to a single traveller passing through the city. A physician who had treated patients with atypical pneumonia in Guangdong made a stop-over in a four-star hotel in Hong Kong February 21, 2003. After his stay, guests and visitors on the hotel’s 9th floor became infected and eventually disseminated the disease globally (WHO 2003b).

Second, only in Hong Kong SARS showed a particular puzzling pattern of transmission. The housing complex of Amoy Gardens became the site of a disproportional share of infected persons, qualifying as a point source outbreak. Airborne and waterborne transmission could not be supported by laboratory results and the Amoy Gardens outbreak hints at an environmental source still not fully understood (Anderson et al. 2004).

Third, SARS in Hong Kong became a much severe political problem rather than only a medical crisis (Ma 2004). The epidemic evoked an intense political debate where angry citizens attacked the Chief Executive of the Hong Kong government for being complacent and for downplaying the threat at its outset. The SARS crisis took place in a phase where the government already had been caught in the crossfire of conflicting demands and interests in the changing business environment after the handover (Chiu and Lui 2009). Besides the high share of fatalities and a crisis of confidence into the city government, Hong Kong also suffered an economical blow with half of the regular retail sales in April 2003 and one third of the regular tourism arrivals vanishing (Price-Smith and Huang 2009). Though hard to estimate, the Wall Street Journal calculated SARS related economic damage in Hong Kong to up to 15 billion US$ (Saywell et al. 2003).

For several reasons, Hong Kong may also be considered a special example for measures of infection control.

First, the efforts of infection control in Hong Kong do receive considerable attention from a Global Health community. Being a gateway to China and Asia and given the unparalleled population density, many observers already considered Hong Kong a likely place for a new disease to emerge (Fidler 2004). The Global Health community expressed an expectation towards Hong Kong to assure the containment of a possible next disease.

Second, a central aim of the Chief Executive of the SAR government since the late 1990ies had been to establish the image of Hong Kong as “Asia’s World City”. Especially after the handover, ambitious projects had been funded to secure the Hong Kong’s position among ‘global cities’ and to further attract the relocation of headquarters and foreign investment (Chiu and Lui 2009). The West Kowloon project for example was planned in 1998 as a leading international arts and cultural centre (Chu 2010). Against this policy of “world class city”-branding, the SARS crisis turned out to be additionally devastating and it became especially important for the government to send a strong message of disease prevention afterwards.

Due to such external and internal pressures the public health intervention is expected to be especially thorough in the aftermath of the SARS crisis. The case of Hong Kong could serve as a lucid example of local public health interventions in the context of an ‘emerging diseases worldview’.

