## Conclusion

The SARS event of 2003 and the efforts of infection control in Hong Kong can be seen as a specific solution to the broader problem of governing uncertainty. The ‘emerging diseases worldview’ that informed the perception of SARS in the Global Health community and that also may have framed the local response in Hong Kong, illustrates current fears of incalculable threats for the issue of health. “The specter of essentially incalculable […] risks” and the question of how to govern them, “has emerged as one of the great technical, political, and ethical challenges of the early twenty-first century” (Jasanoff 2010, 16) as Sheila Jasanoff notes.

Health policies in Hong Kong on the one hand arguably have to be considered a highly particular example in a city state with strong dependence on Chinese supervision, in one of the most densely populated cities and in an Asian city with strong Global city aspirations and connections. On the other hand, the changing infection control after SARS may be seen as a bold answer to the general challenge of governing incalculable risks. The considerable strong emphasis on infection control in the specific situation after the SARS crisis may allow to better mark out the traits of a new mode of governing catastrophe. The current multiplication of threat scenarios that all share a low probability - high impact characteristic – such as international terrorism, the failure of critical infrastructures or emerging diseases – is raising the question of how to govern insecurity (Lentzos and Rose 2009). The example of infection control in Hong Kong allows to understand impacts and effects of such a shift that may be instructive beyond the specific context.
On the one side, the fear of the unknown is sought to overcome through a spatialization of the threat. The interplay of power relations in the aftermath of SARS brought certain technologies into effect in order to cope with the uncertain threat by localizing “sick bodies” in the city. The identification and mapping of “infected buildings” introduces a new way of reading the city and sustains existing social bias and spatial segregation of rich and poor with an assumed medical reasoning.
On the other side, the city becomes reconsidered as an organism whose vital functions need to be measured and whose cleanliness is directly connected to the health of its inhabitants. Emphasizing infection control does refocus public health away from individual wellbeing and towards the prevention of ruptures in the functioning of health infrastructures. Early detection and rapid intervention are concerned with the outbreak and less with the role of social conditions in the production of disease. The collective body metaphor further legitimizes a thorough hygiene regime that is felt especially by those who depend on the use of public spaces in the city.

